Add new blog post 'Publishing Glean.js' (#3)
brizental/brizental.github.io: _posts/2021-04-07-publishing-glean-js.markdown

---
layout: post

> title:  "This Week in Glean: Publishing Glean.js or How I configured a Javascript package that has multiple entry points"

Author: ```suggestion
title:  "This Week in Glean: Publishing Glean.js or How I configured an npm package that has multiple entry points"
```

date:   2021-04-07 18:00:00 +0100
categories: glean mozilla twig
---

_(“This Week in Glean” is a series of blog posts that the Glean Team at Mozilla is using to try to
communicate better about our work. They could be release notes, documentation, hopes, dreams, or
whatever: so long as it is inspired by Glean. You can find

> [an index of all TWiG posts online](https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/appendix/twig.htm)._

Author: ```suggestion
[an index of all TWiG posts online](https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/appendix/twig.htm))._
```

All "This Week in Glean" blog posts are listed in the [TWiG index](https://mozilla.github.io/glean/book/appendix/twig.html)
(and on the [Mozilla Data blog](https://blog.mozilla.org/data/category/glean/)).

> This article is [cross-posted on the Mozilla Data blog](https://blog.mozilla.org/data/<TODO>).

Author: ```suggestion
This article is [cross-posted on the Mozilla Data blog](https://blog.mozilla.org/data/2021/04/07/this-week-in-glean-publishing-glean-js/).
```

---

A few weeks ago, it came the time for us to publish the first version of Glean.js in npm. (Yes,
it has been published. Go [take a look](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@mozilla/glean)). In order

> to publish a package on npm, it is important to define the package entry points in the projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to publish a package on npm, it is important to define the package entry points in the project's
```

[`package.json`](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html) file. The entry point is the path to the file
that should be loaded when users import a package through `import Package from "package-name"` or
`const Package = require("package-name")`.

> My knowledge in this area, went as far as "Hm, I think that [`main`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/configuring-npm/package-json#main)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My knowledge in this area went as far as "Hm, I think that [`main`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/configuring-npm/package-json#main)
```

field in the `package.json` is where we define the entry point, right?". Yes, I was right about that,

> but turns out that was not enough for Glean.js.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it turns out that was not enough for Glean.js.
```

## The case of Glean.js

Glean.js is an implementation of Glean for Javascript environments. "Javascript environments" can
mean multiple things: Node.js servers, Electron apps, websites, webextensions... The list goes on.

> To complicate things, Glean.js needs to access a bunch of platform specific APIs, such as client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To complicate things, Glean.js needs to access a bunch of platform specific APIs such as client
```

```json
{
  "name": "glean",
  ...
  "exports": {
    "./webext": "path/to/entry/point/webext.js",
    "./node": "path/to/entry/point/node.js",
  }
}
```

> Another nice thing about the `exports` field, is that it denies access to any other entry point
> that is not defined in the `exports` map. Users can't just import any file in your package anymore.
> Neat.

We must also define entry points for the type declarations of our package. Type declarations are
necessary for users attempting to import the package in Typescript code. Glean.js is in Typescript,
so it is easy enough for us to _generate_ the type definitions, but we hit a wall when want to expose
the generated definitions. From the ["Publishing"](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/declaration-files/publishing.html#including-declarations-in-your-npm-package)
page on Typecript's documentation, this is the example provided:

```json
{
  "name": "awesome",
  "author": "Vandelay Industries",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "main": "./lib/main.js",
  "types": "./lib/main.d.ts"
}
```

Notice the `types` property. It works just like the `main` property. It does not accept an object,

> but only a single entry point. And here we go again, what do you do when the package has multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only a single entry point. And here we go again, what do you do when the package has multiple
```

, also known as ESM. This is the offical Javascript module system and is the one where we import
packages by using the `import Package from "package"` syntax and export modules by using the
`export default Package` syntax.

Packages can provide different builds using each module system. In the `exports` field, Node.js
allows packages to define different export paths to be imported depending on the module system
a user is relying on. This feature is called ["conditional exports"](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#packages_conditional_exports).

Assuming you have gone through all the setup involved in building a hybrid NPM module for both
ESM and CommonJS (to learn more about how to do that, refer to [this great blog post](https://www.sensedeep.com/blog/posts/2021/how-to-create-single-source-npm-module.html)),
this is how our example can be changed to use conditional exports:

```json
{
  "name": "glean",
  ...
  "exports": {
    "./webext": "path/to/entry/point/webext.js",
    "./node": {
      "import": "path/to/entry/point/node.js",
      "require": "path/to/entry/point/node.cjs",
    },
    ...

>   }

Author: ```suggestion
  },
```

  "typesVersions": {
    "*": {
      "./webext": [ "path/to/types/definitions/webext.d.ts" ],
      "./node": [ "path/to/types/definitions/node.d.ts" ],
      ...
    }
  }
}
```

The same change is not necessary for the `./webext` entry point, because users building for browsers
will need to use bundlers such as [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) and [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org/guide/en/),
which have their own implementation of import/require statement resolutions and are able to import
both ESM and CommonJS modules either [out-of-the-box](https://webpack.js.org/guides/ecma-script-modules/#flagging-modules-as-esm)
or through [plugins](https://github.com/rollup/plugins/tree/master/packages/commonjs).

> Note that there is also no need to change the `typesVersions` value for `./node` after this change.

## Final considerations

> Although the steps in this post look straight forward enough, it took me quite a while to figure out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the steps in this post look straightforward enough, it took me quite a while to figure out
```

the correct way to configure the Glean.js' entry points. I encountered many caveats along the way, such
as the `typesVersions` workaround I mentioned above, but also:

- In order to support ES6 modules, it is necessary to include the filename and extension in all internal
package import statements. CommonJS infers the extension and the filename when it is not provided,
but ES6 doesn't. This get's extra weird in Glean.js' codebase, because Glean.js is in Typescript

> and still all our import statements have the `.js` extension. See more discussion about this on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and all our import statements still have the `.js` extension. See more discussion about this on
```

[this issue](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/16577#issuecomment-754941937) and
[our commit with this change](https://github.com/mozilla/glean.js/pull/123/commits/607c9d5285298f7afbc6187d3b2bdd7d0c1f25b3).

> - Webpack below version 5, does not have support for the `exports` field and is not able to import a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Webpack, below version 5, does not have support for the `exports` field and is not able to import a
```

package that defined entry points only using this feature. See the [Webpack 5 release notes](https://webpack.js.org/blog/2020-10-10-webpack-5-release/#major-changes-new-nodejs-ecosystem-features).
- Other exports conditions such as `browser`, `production` or `development` are mentioned
in the [Node.js documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#packages_conditions_definitions),
but are ultimately ignored by Node.js. They are used by bundlers such as Webpack and Rollup. The Webpack
documentation has [a comprehensive list of all the conditions](https://webpack.js.org/guides/package-exports/#conditions)

> you can possibly include in that list, which bundler supports each and whether Node.js supports it too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can possibly include in that list, which bundler supports each, and whether Node.js supports it too.
```

> Hope this guide is helpful to other people on the internet. Bye! 👋

Reviewer: Woosh, boy was it ever helpful to me!  I think it was amazing and I learned a ton about the JS implementation of Glean.  Thanks!
